---
student_name: [Sami Babayandarjazi]
topic: [#2: Based on the course material and your research, categorize, analyze, and weigh benefits and drawbacks of the different governance models for digital commons. ]
---
Although there are various governance models for digital commons, this paper will present a comparative analysis between community-based and 'benevolent dictator for life' (BDFL) governance models. I will use Wikipedia and Linux Kernel, two types of digital commons, to showcase the difference between the aforementioned governance models and their benefits and drawbacks.  

Wikipedia operates under a decentralized, community-driven governance structure. That is to say, Wikipedia relies on a large network of volunteers (i.e., the Wikipedia community) to manage the creation and editing of content on the site under established policies and guidelines (Wikimedia Foundation n.d.; Iskander, 2024; "Wikipedia: Policies and Guidelines," 2024). Most content decisions are made collaboratively on every Wikipedia article's 'Talk' page (Iskander, 2024). On these pages, contributors collaborate, debate, and discuss to find common ground on organizing, editing, or revising articles (Iskander, 2024). However, in situations where guidelines need to be enforced or where there is a dispute that the contributors cannot resolve, administrators — experienced editors granted extra technical tools and responsibilities — step in ("Wikipedia: Administrators," 2024.; Meyer, 2012). Essentially, administrators act as janitors on the platform (Meyer, 2012). They can delete certain pages, block disruptive users from editing, or protect certain pages from editing ("Wikipedia: Administrators," 2024) to ensure the platform remains organized and safe from abuse (Meyer, 2012). 

The Wikimedia Foundation is a non-profit organization that hosts Wikipedia (Wikimedia Foundation, n.d.) and handles things like funding, technical support, and legal protections for the platform (Iskander, 2024). However, the Foundation does not interfere with or make direct decisions on the editorial content (i.e., writing or editing articles) (Wikimedia Foundation, n.d.). Ultimately, the Wikipedia community has exclusive editorial control over the articles on the platform and is responsible for ensuring the written content is held to a high standard of reliability, verifiability, and neutrality through the established guidelines and active collaboration (Wikimedia Foundation n.d.). 

There are various benefits to Wikipedia's governance model. First, it attracts contributors from across the world with diverse backgrounds and perspectives, which in turn enriches Wikipedia's editorial content with a wide range of perspectives (e.g., cultural, regional and professional). This makes articles more comprehensive and nuanced, covering topics from multiple angles. Additionally, this governance model makes the platform highly responsive to new information, allowing it to update content quickly. Since Wikipedia has thousands of contributors, the platform can reflect changes to editorial content almost in real-time (especially for current events), allowing articles to remain timely and relevant. Finally, this governance model promotes strong engagement and a sense of ownership among contributors, which can enhance the quality of the content on the platform. One can imagine that contributors in the Wikipedia community feel a significant personal investment in and responsibility for the platform and the content published, and therefore, put in considerable effort to ensure the platform and its articles reflect high levels of reliability, accuracy, and quality. 

There are also several drawbacks to this governance model. First, since anyone can contribute to the articles on the platform, quality inconsistencies exist across the articles. While some articles may be detailed, accurate, and well-sourced, others may lack depth, be biased, or not well-sourced. Another drawback is that the platform is vulnerable to vandalism or 'edit wars.' Although Wikipedia has implemented strategies to identify and correct malicious edits, vandalism is still a significant concern for the platform. In the case of 'edit wars,' when disagreements arise, especially on controversial topics, contributors may repeatedly overwrite each other's changes, creating instability in certain articles. 

In contrast, the Linux kernel operates under a 'benevolent dictator for life' (BDFL) governance model (Hanganu & Gardler, 2010a), combining hierarchy, meritocracy, and collaboration. Linus Torvalds acts as the central authority (or BDFL) of the kernel, maintaining a clear vision for its development, setting its technical direction, and serving as the ultimate arbiter of major decisions pertaining to it (Hanganu & Gardler, 2010a; Hanganu & Gardler, 2010b). Beneath Torvalds, a hierarchical structure of maintainers exists to ensure the project's complexity is managed efficiently (SE Daily, 2017; Vetter, 2018; Ruff & Peters, n.d.). These maintainers oversee specific parts of the kernel and are entrusted with responsibilities because of their demonstrated skills and experience (SE Daily Podcast, 2017; Hanganu & Gardler, 2010a; Ruff & Peters, n.d.). However, the project's development process is fundamentally open and decentralized, meaning that anyone can propose changes to the kernel by submitting 'patches' (Hanganu & Gardler, 2010a; SE Daily, 2017 ). Contributions are subjected to rigorous peer review by maintainers and, often, by Torvalds himself (SE Daily, 2017).

There are several benefits to this governance model. First, as the BDFL, Torvalds provides a singular vision and direction for the project, which maintains coherence in the project's development and prevents fragmentation. Relatedly, since Torvalds has the authority to make unilateral final decisions, he can efficiently resolve conflicts, saving time and resources. Third, since there is a network of seemingly experienced and qualified maintainers who thoroughly review contributions, one may argue that only well-tested code is approved and integrated into the project, promoting the project's success. Finally, since anyone can contribute, the Linux kernel benefits from having developers worldwide (including individuals and organizations) contribute to the project (SE Daily, 2017), fostering innovation.

However, there are two key drawbacks to this governance model. First, since Torvalds acts as the kernel's central authority, the project's progression and success heavily relies on his due diligence and temperament. For example, if Torvalds makes a mistake, such as approving the integration of a bad or useless feature into the project, that may "unnecessarily consume resources and have adverse effects on the software" (Petrocelli, 2019). Moreover, a BDFL who is unfriendly, oppressive, or overbearing may prevent talented developers from wanting to contribute to the project, stifling progress (Petrocelli, 2019). Although this governance model refers to the acting central authority as a 'benevolent dictator,' the acting central authority of the project may not, in fact, be 'benevolent.' Second, one may argue that the hierarchical nature of this governance model limits the diversity of perspectives in the decision-making process, which can hamper the project's growth. Innovative ideas deviating from Torvald's established vision may be overlooked, hindering the kernel's advancement.

Adopting any governance model depends on the digital common's objectives and context. Wikipedia's community-based governance model would be suitable for a project that wishes to encourage broad participation and capitalize on collective intelligence. In other words, projects that are interested in aggregating diverse perspectives on various topics would benefit from adopting this governance model. In contrast, the BDFL governance model is suitable for complex projects (e.g., software development initiatives) that require centralized leadership to provide a clear vision and direction to the project and maintain technical consistency and quality. 



Bibliography

Hanganu, G., & Gardler, R. (2010a, February 15). OSS Watch. OSSWatch. http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/governancemodels 
Hanganu, G., & Gardler, R. (2010b, February 15). OSS Watch. OSSWatch. http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/benevolentdictatorgovernancemodel 
Iskander, M. (2024, November 25). Love Wikipedia? get to know the nonprofit behind it. Wikimedia Foundation. https://wikimediafoundation.org/news/2024/11/25/love-wikipedia-get-to-know-the-nonprofit-behind-it/ 
Meyer, R. (2012, July 16). 3 charts that show how Wikipedia is running out of admins. The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/07/3-charts-that-show-how-wikipedia-is-running-out-of-admins/259829/ 
Petrocelli, T. (2019, January 8). Is the end of the benevolent dictator for life in open-source software here?. CMSWire.com. https://www.cmswire.com/information-management/is-the-end-of-the-benevolent-dictator-for-life-in-open-source-software-here/ 
Ruff, N., & Peters, S. (n.d.). Participating in open source communities. Participating in Open Source Communities. https://www.linuxfoundation.org/resources/open-source-guides/participating-in-open-source-communities#:~:text=In%20some%20cases%2C%20this%20is,related%20to%20the%20Linux%20kernel. 
SE Daily. (2017, June 28). Linux Kernel Governance with Greg Kroah-Hartman. Software Engineering Daily. December 6, 2024, https://softwareengineeringdaily.com/2017/06/28/linux-kernel-governance-with-greg-kroah-hartman/ 
Vetter, D. (2018, April 27). Linux kernel maintainer statistics. Linux.com. https://www.linux.com/news/linux-kernel-maintainer-statistics/ 
Wikimedia Foundation. (n.d.). Home. https://wikimediafoundation.org/ 
Wikipedia:Administrators. (2024, November 16). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Administrators
Wikipedia:Policies and guidelines. (2024, October 24). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Policies_and_guidelines
